tutorial first draft (#156)
caporaso-lab/developing-with-qiime2: book/plugins/how-to-guides/include-R-in-plugins.md

Next, an R script was created by the plugin developers wherein the various DADA2 R functions are called as specified by the over-arching QIIME 2 action. This R script was written for two reasons. First, DADA2 does not have a command line interface that can be called directly from a shell instance within Python. Second, even if DADA2 did have a command line interface, it would likely have still been desirable to have the more granular control over DADA2's function that is afforded by calling them in the R language itself. This R script is located in `q2_dada2/assets/run_dada.R`. This `assets/` directory is where any such plugin-specific R source code should be placed. The R script is written so as to be callable from the command line and uses the `optparse` R package to allow parameterization when being called. The R script is then called in Python using the `subprocess` Python standard library function. An example of such a call and the various parameters being passed to the R script can be seen in the `_denoise_single` function in the `q2_dada2/_denoise.py` file.

> Input data is passed to the DADA2 software in two ways. Simple parameters to functions such as a base pair position, or the name of a type of algorithm, are passed as parameters to the R script as discussed earlier. Large data, such as the sequences to be denoised, have to be handed over using the filesystem. Thus the Python software places the sequences in a location and format expected by the DADA2 software. The output data is handled similiarly; the Python software finds the output sequences in the locaton specified by DADA2 and processes them into the format that it requires. The specifics for transferring data that is in a format and location that the Python plugin software controls into a format and location that ones R software expects will vary. However, common patterns include using temporary directories and files with the `tempfile` Python standard library module and passing filepaths from the Python software to the R software, and back.

Author: Not sure what you mean by a python script, but yes ultimately some wrapping python will have to be written because we're in a plugin.

### The Embedded Approach
The embedded approach refers in essence to interacting with R software directly and repeatedly, from Python. The tool that will be discussed here that allows one to do this is the [rpy2 software](https://rpy2.github.io). Rpy2 is a python package that allows users to seamlessly call R software from within python by running an R interpreter in the background, translating Python API calls into R, and returning the results back into the Python interpreter.

> Where the separated approach is best suited for stand-alone, mature R software that is interfaced with relatively seldomly and in a well-defined manner, the embedded approach allows a more interactive and "scripting" like experience. This is because rpy2 offers a vast set of tools for calling R code, including a functionality to execute any arbitrary R expression, from within Python. See the rpy2 documentation for details. It's important to note however that rpy2 is equally as capable of interfacing with mature APIs of standalone R packages, and can be used to do so without writing any R code.

Reviewer: Can you give an example of when you might want interactive and "scripting"?

> As a concrete example of this approach, we'll refer to the `q2-qsip2` plugin, which can be visited [here](https://github.com/caporaso-lab/q2-qsip2). This plugin wraps the qSIP2 R package, which is available [here](https://github.com/jeffkimbrel/qSIP2). The qSIP2 package allows users to analyze the results of quantitative [stable isotope probing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stable-isotope_probing) projects. The embedded approach was considered more desirable in this case because the qSIP2 package is less mature than e.g. DADA2, and was still under development at the time of creating the plugin. Such software packages are less likely to have stable APIs and so being able to interface with the package at a fine-grained level is an important ability that rpy2 gives us. Furthermore, such software is more likely to have bugs or small pieces of missing functionality. Here again, the embedded approach is advantageous in that it lets us write small amounts of R code to patch gaps in functionality, directly in Python. Such gaps in functionality can be dealt with on the fly instead of needing separately maintained R scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a concrete example of this approach, we'll refer to the `q2-qsip2` plugin, which can be visited [here](https://github.com/caporaso-lab/q2-qsip2). This plugin wraps the qSIP2 R package, which is available [here](https://github.com/jeffkimbrel/qSIP2). The qSIP2 package allows users to analyze the results of quantitative [stable isotope probing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stable-isotope_probing) projects. The embedded approach was considered more desirable in this case because the qSIP2 package is less mature than e.g. DADA2, and was still under development at the time the plugin was created. Such software packages are less likely to have stable APIs and so being able to interface with the package at a fine-grained level is an important ability that rpy2 gives us. Furthermore, such software is more likely to have bugs or small pieces of missing functionality. Here again, the embedded approach is advantageous in that it enables us to write small amounts of R code to patch gaps in functionality, directly in Python. Such gaps in functionality can be dealt with on the fly instead of requiring separately maintained R scripts.
```

- When using many different pieces of R software.
- When you are more comfortable writing Python than R.
- When you want to reduce the complexity that arises from maintaining code written in two different programming languages.

## How to Include R Dependencies in QIIME 2 Plugins
### Conda Packages
As noted above, by the far most preferrable option is to use conda packages when they are available for the R software that you wish to include as a dependency of your plugin. To see whether an R package is available as a conda package your can search for it on [anaconda.org](https://anaconda.org). For example navigating here and entering "dada2" into the "search packages" search bar shows that the DADA2 package is available from the "bioconda" channel under the name "bioconductor-dada2". With this information we can now easily add DADA2 as a dependency to our plugin. First, we navigate to `conda-recipe/meta.yaml` and then we add `bioconductor-dada2` under the `run` section of the `requirements` section.

```yaml
requirements:
  run:
  - python {{ python }}
  - biom-format {{ biom_format }}
  - bioconductor-dada2
```

> This informs conda that the DADA2 package is a requirement that the package needs to execute properly. This means conda will install it at the same time the python package representing the plugin is installed. Note that only conda packages that are hosted either by the `bioconda` or by the `conda-forge` channels can be included in this fashion.

Reviewer: This looks weird but generates fine

> ### When a Conda Package is Not Available

Author: This section is independent of the embedded/separated distinction--in either case you'll usually need to install R dependencies.
